in the 1950s Andy Warhol created
silkscreen portraits of celebrities
using mass-produced images and
non-traditional blocks of color which
became pop art icons I'm going to show
you a fun and easy technique to transfer
and duplicate images onto clay tiles
then by adding interesting color
combinations students can create their
own pop art self-portraits hi I'm Mary
Skye DOMA and I'd like to introduce you
to pop art clay portraits first have
students find a photograph of themselves
and make a black or black-and-white copy
of it a close-up works best and it
should be as simple as possible you'll
want your work tables to be covered in
canvas to keep the clay from sticking a
white clay body works best for vibrant
color and you can cut the slabs right
from the block I've rolled a slab of
clay about a quarter inch thick a
thickness strip on each side of the slab
helps to keep the slab even and you want
to roll both ways across the slab to
align the clay particles and reduce your
chances of warping later the slab is
just slightly larger than the image I'm
going to use so have your students
decide which features of the photograph
need to be transferred to make the most
effective simplified line drawing I'm
going to use a gel pen to go over the
lines of the photo then I'm going to
transfer to the clay
I like to mark the four corners for ease
of cutting later I just like to put
small little marks in the corners with
my gel pen that I'm going to use as a
guide so we're going to place the image
face down onto the clay and rub it with
your fingers we're just going to let it
sit for a few seconds we're going to
peel up the paper to check the transfer
if it's not quite dark enough wait a few
more seconds and remove the paper if
your clay is slightly drier a little
mist on the back of the paper will do
the trick
your portrait has transferred and as you
can see it's now a mirror image at this
point I'm going to use a ruler to cut
the slab into a tile I'm using these
little marks I left as a guide on the
corners okay and you can just smooth the
edges of the tile slightly a little
water on your finger tips and then we're
going to start carving now we're going
to use a small ribbon tool to carve into
our image this soft slab can very easily
be carved some might prefer to let the
clay stiffen slightly and you'll figure
out which you prefer in addition to
using these ribbon tools to carve you
can also just use a single layer of a
baggie place it over the tile and use a
pen to just go over your lines this is
going to result in a nice smooth edge
without burrs you can see how that turns
out try not to move the tile other than
to flip it over once or twice for even
drawing when the tile is completely dry
or fired it's time to apply color I like
to fill all my carved lines in with
black paint to mimic the black outline
many of the pop artists use if your tile
is fired
you can paint black acrylic paint into
the lines
I'm just moistening it a little bit with
clear water I'm just going to take some
plain old black acrylic and brush it
over about a quarter of the tile at a
time I'm going to move a little bit
quickly so that you don't have a whole
lot to remove then you just go back with
your sponge and wipe off the surface of
the tile it's going to leave the black
acrylic in the carved areas if your tile
is made of air dry clay the black claim
must be painted into the carved areas
now with a small brush we can apply
color for this project
blick studio critics give good coverage
on either the fight fired tile or the
air dry one pastels are another option
but should be sprayed with a fixative as
a last step
oil color colors also work well and give
a very deep color saturated finished
product and ceramic under glazes look
great as is or with a clear glaze on top
a pdf version of this lesson plan along
with materials list and national
standards are available on the blick
lesson plans page